## Introduction to Smart Contract

### A simple Smart Contract

Let us begin with a basic example that sets the value of a variable and exposes it for other contracts to access.

Storage Example

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity >=0.4.16 <0.9.0;

contract SimpleStorage {
    uint256 storedData;

    function set(uint256 x) public {
        storedData = x;
    }

    function get() public view returns (uint) {
        return storedData;
    }
}
```

The first line tells you that the source code is licensed under the MIT version. Machine readable license specifiers are important in a setting where publishing the source code is the default.

The next line specifies that the source code is written for Solidity version 0.4.16, or a newer version of the language up to,  but not including version 0.9.0. This is to ensure that the contract is not compatible with a new (breaking) compiler version, where it could behave differently. Pragmas are common instructions for compilers about how to treat the source code.

A contract in the sense of Solidity is a collection of code (its function) and data (its state) that resides at a specific address on the Ethereum blockchain. The line `uint storedData;` declares a state variable called `storedData` of type `uint` (unsigned integer of 256 bits). You can think of it as a single slot in a database that you can query and alter by calling functions of the code that manages the database. In this example, the contract defines the functions `set` and `get` that can be used to modify or retrieve the value of the variable.

To access a member (like a state variable) of the current contract, you do not typically add the `this.` prefix, you just access it directly via its name. Unlike in some other languages, omitting it is not just a matter of style, it results in a completely different way to access the member, but mor on this later.

This contract does not do much yet apart from (due to the infrastructure built by Ethereum) allowing anyone to strore a single number that is accessible by anyone in the world without a (feasible) way to prevent you from publishing this number. Anyone could call `set` again with a different value and overwrite your number, but the number is still stored in the history of the blockchain. Later, you will see how you can impose access restrictions so that only you can alter the number.

### Subcurrency Example

The following contract implements the simplest form of a cryptocurrency. The contract allows only its creator to create new coins (different issuance schemes are possible). Anyone can send coins to each other without a need for registering with a username and password, all you need is an Ethereum keypair.

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.26;

// This will only compile via IR
contract Coin {
    // The keyword "public" makes variables
    // accessible from other contracts
    address public minter;
    mapping(address => uint) public balances;

    // Events allow clients to react to specific
    // contract changes you declare
    event Sent(address from, address to, uint amount)

    // Constructor code is only run when the contract is created
    constructor() {
        minter = msg.sender;

    }

    // Sends an amount of newly created coins to an address
    // Can only be called by the contract creator
    function mint(address receiver, uint amount) public {
        require(msg.sender == minter);
        balances[receiver] += amount;
    }

    // Errors allow you to provide information about
    // why an operation failed. They are returned
    // to the caller of the function
    error InsufficientBalance(uint requested, uint available);

    // Sends an amount of existing coins
    // from any caller to an address
    function send(address receiver, uint amount) public {
        require(amount <= balances[msg.sender],InsufficientBalance(amount, balances[msg.sender]));
        balances[msg.sender] -= amount;
        balances[receiver] += amount;
        emit Sent(msg.sender, receiver, amount);
    }
}
```

Schéma d'un contrat

This contract introduces some new concepts, let us go through them one by one.

The line `address public minter;` declares a state variable of type address. The `address` type is a 160-bit value that does not allow any arithmetic operations. It is suitable for storing addresses of contracts, or a hash of the public half of a keypair belonging to exernally-owned accounts.

The keyword `public` automatically generates a function that allows you to access the current value of the state variable from outside the contract. Without this keyword, other contracts have no way to access the variable. The code of the function generated bye the compiler is equivalent to the following (ignore `external` and `view` for now):

`function minter() external view returns (address) {return minter;}`

You could add a function like the above yourself, but you would have a function and a state variable with the same name. You do not need to do this, the compiler figures it out for you.

The next line, `mapping(address => uint) public balances;` also creates a public state variable, but it is a more complex datatype. The mapping type maps addresses to unsigned integers.

Mapping can be seen as hash tables which are virtually initialized such that every possible key exists from the start and is mapped to a value whose byte-representation is all zeros. However, it is neither possible to obtain a list of all keys of a mapping, nor a list of all values. Record what you added to the mapping, or use it in a context where this is not needed. Or even better, keep a list, or use a more suitable data type.

The getter function created by the public keyword is more complex in the case of a mapping. It looks like the following:

```solidity
function balances(address account) external view returns (uint) {
    return balances[account];
} 
```

You can use this function to query the balance of a single account.

The line `event Sent(address from, address to, uint amount);` declares an event, which is emitted in the last line of the function `send`. Ethereum clients such as web applications can listen for these events emitted on the blockchain without much cost. As soon as it is emitted,the listener receives the arguments `from`, `to` and `amount`, which makes it possible to track transactions.

To listen for this event, you could use the following JavaScript code, which uses web3.js to create the `Coin` contract object, and any user interface calls the automatically generated `balances` function from above:

```javascript
Coin.Sent().watch({}, '', function(error, result) {
    if (!error) {
        console.log("Coin transfer: " + result.args.amount +
            " coins were sent from " + result.args.from +
            " to " + result.args.to + ".");
        console.log("Balances now:\n" + 
            "Sender: " + Coin.balances.call(result.args.from) +
            "Receiver: " + Coin.balances.call(result.args.to));
    }
})
```

The constructor is a special function that is executed during the creation of the contract and cannot be called afterwards. In this case, it permanently stores the address of the person creating the contract. The `msg` variable (together with `tx` and `block`) is a special global variable that contains properties which allow access to the blockchain. `msfg.sender` is always the address where the current (external) where the current (external) function call came from.

The functions that make up the contract, and that users and contracts can call are `mint` and `send`.

The `mint` function sends an amount of newly created coins to another address. The require function call defines conditions that reverts all changes if not met. In this examples, `require(msg.sender==minter);` ensures that only the creator of the contract can call `mint`. In general, the creator can mint as many tokens as they like, but at some point, this will lead to a phenomenon called "overflow". Note that because of the default Checked arithmetic, the transaction would revert if the expression `balances[receiver] += amount;` overflows, i.e., when `balances[receiver] + amount` in arbitrary precision arithmetic is larger than the maximum value of `uint(2**256 - 1)`. This is also true for the statement `balances[msg.sender] -= amount;` in the function `send`.

Errors allow you to provide more information to the caller about why a condition or operation failed. Errors are used together with the revert statement. The `revert` statement unconditionally aborts and reverts all changes, much like the require function. Both approaches allow you to provide the name of an error and additional data which will be supplied to the caller (and eventually to the front-end application or block explorer) so that a failure can more easily be debugged or react upon.

The `send` function can be used by anyone (who already has some of these coins) to send coins to anyone else. If the sender does not have enough coins to send, the `if` condition evaluates to true. As a result, the `revert` will cause the operation to fail while providing the sender with error details using the `InsufficientBalance`

Note:
If you use this contract to send coins to an address, you will not see anything when you look at that address on a blockchain explorer, because the record that you sent coins and the changed balances are only stored in the data storage of this particular coin contract. By using events, you can create a "blockchain explorer" that tracks transactions and balances of your new coin, but you have to inspect the coin contract address and not the addresses of the coin owners.